every game should have a bell-curve
be that player activity sales would
everyone should just do that and then
you should just die quietly and go do
something else right and yeah the truth
is runescape hit that inflection point
about 2007 it was growing really really
strong I don't think we could have done
anything to mess it up even though we
clearly did a lot of people remember the
year 2012 as one of the worst and
RuneScape's history with it brought the
evolution of combat squeal of fortune
and Solomon's story
coincidentally it was the same year Paul
and Andrew Gower two of the game's
original creators stepped down from the
board of directors at jagex
and were replaced with investment firms
this is the story of how management may
have intentionally held old school
runescape back
before we get to that though we do have
a sponsor for today's video it's a
little unusual but stick with it
essential oils aromas for natural
wellness and healing but current
products aren't made for gamers now
there's a better way to holistically
improve your game with sense like
strategy kill death ratio
all of them mostly saved and distilled
using major science
you watch well at least it's not another
red shadow legend said am i right fight
this video was actually brought to you
by raid shadow legends raid is a
free-to-play here a collection RPG
available on get this both mobile and PC
devices this way you have multiple ways
to play and make sure you're able to
participate in their daily login rewards
program and now for new players it's
been doubled from 90 days to 180 days
each day you can claim your free rewards
from energy refills silver and gems to
shards and a free barbarian legendary
champion sill of the Drake if you are a
new player go to the video description
click on the special links and you'll
get a hundred thousand silver 50 gems
one energy refill and one free Champion
adjudicator an extremely good champion
for new players all these rewards can be
found in your in-game inbox right here
and are only available for the next 30
days thank you again to raid for
sponsoring this video and know the oil
shown earlier don't actually exist
before I get started I do want to remind
you that this is just a theory I've
gathered as much evidence as I can on
this topic but don't take it entirely as
fact especially because some j-mods have
refuted it so let's rewind back to the
24th of February 2006 we feel your
status in real life shouldn't affect
your ability to be successful in
runescape this is from a news post on
the runescape website about real world
trade it's a phrase that many players
who around then and even now are likely
familiar with a few years later in
January 2012 the last two Gower brothers
on the board set down an investment firm
known as I VP became the lead
shareholder owning 55% of the company
and two other firms took the Gower seats
at first players were hopeful but you
know obviously concerned the game's
creators were gone and outside companies
now had complete control over jagex
roughly a month later the squeal of
fortune was introduced for those
unfamiliar it was a daily activity where
players could spin this wheel and be
rewarded with weapons armor XP lamps and
coins you were able to purchase
additional spins for about 50 cents each
five months later Solomon store was
launched which allows players to
purchase cosmetic overrides pets and all
sorts of stuff in exchange for real-life
money in the form of Jagex his own
little currency called rune coins
players that remembered we feel your
status in real life shouldn't affect
your ability to be successful in
runescape were well to put it simply
they were pissed
[Music]
hello fellow Jenny's
so let's fast forward again a bit to the
release of old school pretty much nobody
in corporate actually cared everyone
even the people working on old school
believed it wouldn't be around for more
than half a year because the way I saw
it I had six months left of Jagex I'd
spend six months in the publishing
department before I got canned and run
out of money or ice could spend six
months working on something I really was
passionate about which was old school
everybody expected to die in six months
momiji was paying the blinds being
attention to us we had a meeting once a
week with a sub sub products and project
manager the you know didn't honestly
care about what we're doing and thought
it's a waste of time spending half an
hour talking to us as a result the team
was seemingly built around that
mentality because it really only had
four developers for the first year even
after that four years old school had a
handful of j-mods working on it will rs3
had hundreds even when old school
started consistently passing RS 3 in
terms of player count by a significant
amount less than 15 mods were assigned
to old school I'm ready user by the name
RNG greed came up with a theory that one
upper management is milking old school
for what we're worth by inputting as few
resources as possible or to upper
management is terrified that old school
will strongly surpass our history and
player account and a lot of players
agreed as the post got to eight hundred
up votes which was pretty significant
for the time I've used this thread along
with a lot of others to compile some
main points from the community at the
time number one understaffing you
remember the old engine work meme you
serve request back in 2013 to 2015 ish
were denied solely because it would
require changes to the game engine at
the time Ian Gower was the only engine
developer and was backed up on months of
work o SRS used to not have any
graphical artists which is why a lot of
early content is Ries khun's of old or
unused content there were no web
developers so the website was updated in
spare time and the game was seemingly
riddled with bugs
last week they realized that some of the
hidden bonus rewards didn't actually
exist such as the mother lode mine pay
dirt boost and cath
herb patch boost not to mention getting
any sort of update to the games client
was and kind of still is in a way
unheard-of
OS RS is so understaffed that a
third-party client has been outsourced
to do a lot of client features where you
must pay to access many of those
features this is in reference to OS
buddy which at the time was the top
third-party client two types of content
and Ries Kim's due to having an
extremely limited amount of developers
we end up getting only a few types of
content this has led to some people
calling OS RSP VM scape at the time of
this post about two and a half years
after old schools release there were
only three skilling related pieces of
content released motherland mine rooftop
agility and achievement Diaries
meanwhile the game had received about
ten pvm based pieces of content elite
clues Ironman mode free to play and
resizable mode most of the members
content like I mentioned earlier were
Rhys kins of old content as well
for example Kraken nightmare zone every
wilderness boss and so on not to put
that on the old-school team because they
really made what they had work they
simply didn't have the tools to make new
kinds of content in fact when OS iris
first opened there wasn't even a basic
map editor this is why the first real
update didn't happen for eight months
after release and that was nightmare
Zone three community input was
disregarded old school was started with
the premise that everything that goes
into the game is decided by the players
through the polling system many threat
authors seem to say that Jagex didn't
recognize problems until there was
enough community outrage for example one
author complaints that input from the
community about issues isn't recognized
until it's too late
for example nightmare zone and splashing
were considered broken for about a year
before jagex asked for input in a poll
another example is that jagex will ask
the community for input and then ignore
it you used to be able to trade magic
and profit off of it by the free runes
you got a nightmare zone which I guess
did a poll asking if there should be
removed and despite it failing the poll
it was still changed the author is upset
that Jagex will ask players for their
opinion and then just do whatever they
seem fit regardless of what the polls
say the same issue has bubbled up again
with the Vestas long sword drama as its
failed polls three times and is still
planned to be implemented for
free-to-play was impossible according to
another Reddit user jagex says they may
release free to play when BOTS have been
cleaned up by stating that they are
essentially saying they will never
implement free-to-play originally this
was the plan but jagex came up with a
solution
Brida play could only be introduced if
membership bonds were also introduced in
fact this graph they posted in the
discussion shows if they introduce free
to play without bonds it would somehow
caused the game to shrink in the long
run so jagex ran the poll as one
question should we add a full and
permanent freed play service alongside
membership bonds and it passed with 85%
if I'm being honest myself and many
others don't believe that bonds would
have passed if it wasn't for free to
play if you look at free-to-play worlds
even today they're jam-packed with bots
which is exactly what Jagex and the
players were afraid of five micro
transaction pressure every game has
micro transaction pressure from
investors when it comes to modern mmo's
it's really a miracle that bonds are the
only form of it that exists in
old-school and personally they're not
even that bad I believe had it not been
for the staff working on old school and
other Jagex employees passionate about
it the game would be ringed of all the
money it could generate and slowly die
the reason I say this is because of
maplestory the lead investment firm at
Jagex at the time also purchased
maplestory and managed to absolutely
destroy the game they more or less
milked it until they couldn't anymore
according to most of the players the
game quickly became pay2win and survived
on whales who purchased tons of in-game
benefits from them they've since had to
reboot the game in multiple forms if
you'd like I know it's not old school
related but I'm very interested in
making a video about that as well and
deep diving into it anyway I think
before we get to the conclusion of this
video Mon Mack case summarizes the MTX
pressure pretty well in your time
Jagex was there any internal pressure to
try and monetize altough absolutely
absolutely
it wouldn't be a company that there
wasn't company has to look at how it
could maximize the money comes that's
just basically it you forget about the
products that it creates the company
doesn't make money company goes bosses
so which means pressure for MTX has gone
into gone top school absolutely what's
gonna happen I've had conversations with
people who have demanded that it goes in
I've had conversations with people who
said if it doesn't go in the company is
gonna go bust I've had multiple
conversations on that thing where huge
pressure has been put in to make it
happen but one things that I'm sort of
really proud about is no matter what
pressure comes down to me if I go down
to the team and say right
or I went down to the team said right
we're putting in MTX those guys would
push back on me there's been so much
pressure from so many of the people I
mentioned earlier that the company got
incredibly top-heavy with leadership and
the people that were coming in were
asking the right questions from that
point of view you'd have a director of
marketing come in they would say right I
have done this in other games and it
made us millions and millions of pounds
it's like that's great
well done but our game is different if
we were to do that in game we'd lose 100
million pounds a week in conclusion all
talk was meant to die after six months
and would have been a quick nostalgic
cash grab players believe management was
understaffing old school on purpose and
almost no trust was placed in jagex in
terms of updates updates stability and
the polling system the main reason
microtransactions haven't come to old
school is because of the passionate team
backing the game and potentially due to
jagex having different investors to
investors it would make a lot of sense
to put microtransactions in old school
with how well it performed an rs3
although their player base is dipped a
lot they're making a lot of money
compared to old school we don't have
exact numbers but they might even be
making more luckily for us the investors
we have right now seem to understand
that microtransactions simply won't work
with old school so let me know your
thoughts on this theory below do you
think old school was purposely held back
by management or was this just maybe
case of a miscommunication or
mismanagement hopefully enjoyed this
video and I'll see you in the next one
[Music]